Practice guidelines (GL) synthesize the available scientific evidence and assist health care providers by recommending management strategies for patients with a given condition. Quantifying and comparing the adherence to such recommendations has become increasingly important. In many countries binary quality indicators based on routinely collected data have been established for the inpatient sector. However, guideline-compliant treatment during the outpatient follow-up is usually the most relevant for patients in the long run. For this purpose, a procedural quality indicator (PQI) describes one aspect of a recommended treatment which can be assessed by evaluating the trace of a patient in linked routine data bases typically available to social insurance institutions. For example, patients with myocardial infarction (MI) should be given high-intensity statins lifelong after discharge from hospital. A pure binary evaluation of this PQI (patient fully adhered to GL after a certain time or not) may miss the variation in the extent of partial compliances. Moreover, patients may not be observable for the full studied period after their index event because of reinfarction, death or loss-to-follow-up. Thus, the goal of our project was to develop methods for estimating the prevalence of guideline-(non)compliant treatment in patients with MI across regions and the effect of its discontinuation on the 4-year risk of all-cause mortality and total length of all-cause re-hospitalizations.
</br></br> All patients, residing in 116 political districts of Austria, with chronologically the first MI event between 2012 and 2015 were selected from an anonymized population-wide data base provided by the Main Association of Austrian Social Security Institutions. Demographic characteristics and high-dimensional information based on billed hospital stays and filled drug prescriptions collected from a period of three months before the index MI event were used to adjust the analyses for confounding. To overcome the deficiencies of a binary evaluation of PQI, we estimated the expected time of non-adherence across the political districts of Austria via restricted mean failure time (RMFT) that accommodates right-censoring and competing risks (e.g., death or recurrent MI). Analysis used 12 months as the restriction time. We estimated RMFT using pseudo-values, an approach that lends itself to formal causal comparisons, e.g., by outcome regression modelling, inverse probability of treatment weighting or doubly robust estimation. The impact of discontinued compliance on mortality and the cumulative length of later hospital stays was evaluated by means of landmarked Cox and Poisson regressions.
Results revealed low rates of compliance that decreased with age, considerable variation across political districts of Austria and trends over time. The compliance was associated with lower mortality and readmission. Despite these target parameters based on claims data may be imprecise because of missing information on over-the-counter dispensing or clinical data like social-economic status, smoking or body weight, and inaccurate patient inclusion caused by wrong discharge diagnosis codes, they are still interesting statistical parameters with interpretations as average effects adjusted for measured confounding. As such they can be used as a basis for discussions in regional quality circles.
